.Dd October 5, 2024
.Dt IPL 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ipl ,
.Nm splraise ,
.Nm spldpc ,
.Nm splx ,
.Nm splget
.Nd raise or lower Interrupt Priority Level (IPL)
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In kdk/kern.h
.Ft ipl_t
.Fn splraise "ipl_t ipl"
.Ft ipl_t
.Fn spldpc "ipl_t ipl"
.Ft void
.Fn splx "ipl_t ipl"
.Ft ipl_t
.Fn splget void
.Sh DESCRIPTION
These functions are used to modify the interrupt priority level. They are used
to block certain categories of interrupts to ensure safe execution of critical
sections of code.

.Pp
Interrupts are masked by priority, and priorities are hierarchical. When the
interrupt priority level is raised, lower-priority interrupts are disabled until
the priority level is lowered. This affects delivery of interrupts within the
thread that has raised the level. Levels kIPLDPC and above prevent rescheduling,
and therefore act on the CPU core as a whole.

.Pp
Each interrupt handler is associated with an IPL. Entry to an interrupt handler
is always at the IPL the handler is associated with. The IPL can be further
raised above that level, but must return to the handler's associated IPL before
return.

.Pp
The
.Xr rcu 9
and the
.Xr spinlock 9
functionalities also modify IPL as part of their duties.


.Pp
These are the interrupt priority levels from low-to-high, with each higher level
blocking additional interrupts:

.Bl -tag -width kIPLDevice

.It Dv kIPL0
Allows all interrupts. This is the lowest interrupt priority level. All
categories of interrupts are unblocked.

.It Dv kIPLAST
Blocks general non-device interrupts.

.It Dv kIPLDispatch
Additionally blocks dispatch-level interrupts.
.Pp
This is the level at which the scheduler, DPCs, and RCU callbacks run. At this
level and above, the current processor core will not be rescheduled, RCU grace
periods will not end, and DPCs will not run.

.It Dv kIPLDevice
Additionally blocks general device-level interrupts.

.It Dv kIPLClock
Additionally blocks the harldcock interrupt.

.It Dv kIPLIPI
Additionally blocks most inter-processor interrupts (IPIs.)

.It Dv kIPLHigh
Blocks all interrupts. This is the highest interrupt priority level.
.El

.Pp

Note: On some architectures, consecutive subsets of the first four interrupt
levels (kIPLHigh, kIPLIPI, kIPLClock, kIPLDevice) may be merged due to
platform-specific limitations.

.Sh FUNCTIONS
The following functions are provided for managing the interrupt priority level:

.Bl -tag -width spldpc
.It Fn splraise "ipl_t ipl"
Raises the current interrupt priority level to
.Fa ipl
and returns the previous IPL.
.It Fn spldpc void
Raises the current interrupt priority level to
.Dv kIPLDPC .
and returns the previous IPL.
.It Fn splx "ipl_t ipl"
Restores the interrupt priority level to
.Fa ipl .
This function is used to lower the priority level after completing a section
that must run at high IPL.
.It Fn splget void
Returns the current interrupt priority level.

.El

.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm ipl
interface has always been in Keyronex.
