.Dd October 6, 2024
.Dt KSEMAPHORE 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ksemaphore ,
.Nm ke_semaphore_init ,
.Nm ke_semaphore_reset ,
.Nm ke_semaphore_release ,
.Nm ke_semaphore_release_maxone
.Nd dispatcher mutex object
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In kdk/kern.h
.Ft void
.Fn ke_semaphore_init "ksemaphore_t *sem" "unsigned count"
.Ft void
.Fn ke_semaphore_reset "ksemaphore_t *sem" "unsigned count"
.Ft void
.Fn ke_semaphore_release "ksemaphore_t *sem" "unsigned adjustment"
.Ft void
.Fn ke_semaphore_release_maxone "ksemaphore_t *sem"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The dispatcher semaphore object is a dispatcher object that can be waited on by
.Xr ke_wait 9 ,
defined by the
.Vt ksemaphore_t
type.
.Pp
The semaphore object is a counter that can be incremented and decremented.
When the counter is zero, waiters will be put to sleep until the counter is
incremented.
.Pp
Waiters sleep until the counter is positive, and the counter is decremented when
a waiter is satisfied.
.Pp
The
.Fn ke_semaphore_init
function initialises a semaphore object, setting its counter to the value
specified by the
.Fa count
parameter.
.Pp
The
.Fn ke_semaphore_reset
function resets a semaphore object, setting its counter to the value
specified by the
.Fa count
parameter.
.Pp
The
.Fn ke_semaphore_release
function increments the counter of a semaphore object by the value
specified by the
.Fa adjustment
parameter.
.Pp
The
.Fn ke_semaphore_release_maxone
function increments the counter of a semaphore object by one only if the counter
was zero.
.Pp
.Sh CONTEXT
All these functions may be called from any context at or below
.Dv kIPLDPC .
.Sh CODE REFERENCES
These functions are implemented in
.Pa kernel/kern/semaphore.c .
.Pp
The interface is declared in
.Pa kernel/include/kdk/kern.h .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ke_wait 9 ,
.Sh HISTORY
These interfaces have always been in Keyronex.
