.Dd October 6, 2024
.Dt KTIMER 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ktimer ,
.Nm ke_timer_init ,
.Nm ke_timer_set ,
.Nm ke_timer_cancel
.Nd dispatcher timer object
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In kdk/kern.h
.Ft void
.Fn ke_timer_init "ktimer_t *timer"
.Ft void
.Fn ke_timer_set "ktimer_t *timer" "uint64_t nanosecs"
.Ft void
.Fn ke_timer_cancel "ktimer_t *timer"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The dispatcher timer object is a dispatcher object that can be waited on by
.Xr ke_wait 9 ,
defined by the
.Vt ktimer_t
type.
.Pp
The timer object is an object that can be set to expire at a certain time in the
future.
When the timer expires, it becomes signalled and waiters are awoken, then the
timer is disabled again and set non-signalled.
.Pp
The
.Fn ke_timer_init
function initialises a timer object.
.Pp
The
.Fn ke_timer_set
function sets the timer to expire at the time specified by the
.Fa nanosecs
parameter.
.Pp
If the timer is already set, an attempt will be made to cancel the timer. If it
cannot be cancelled, which means the timer is currently becoming signalled, the
function will spin for a short time until the signalling is complete, and then
the timer will be set to the new value.
.Pp
The
.Fn ke_timer_cancel
function tries to cancel the timer. If the timer is already in the process of
becoming signalled, the function will spin for a short time until the signalling
is complete, and then the timer will be cancelled.
.Sh CONTEXT
All these functions may be called from any context at or below
.Dv kIPLDPC .
.Sh CODE REFERENCES
These functions are implemented in
.Pa kernel/kern/timer.c .
.Pp
Additional logic for the timer is implemented in
.Pa kernel/kern/clock.c .
.Pp
The interface is declared in
.Pa kernel/include/kdk/kern.h .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ke_wait 9 ,
.Sh HISTORY
These interfaces have always been in Keyronex.
